You know, he loved to go to the Border Olympics.
Did he ever get loud or was he always soft-spoken?
He was always soft-spoken.
Of course, I wasn't around him coaching much, but when I was, I mean, he never screamed at anybody or anything.
I mean, and he would go, here's something else he would do.
He was a great pole vault coach.
All right.
He would go, he would grab the pole, and some guy would stand there, run down a runway.
Well, he'd run up there and grab the pole.
He'd say, back up, back up.
He said, here's how you do that.
He'd lay down.
He'd lay down on the runway and go through the motions, you know, how you hold your pole there, laying down there.
I mean, the pole walker, I mean, just shocked, standing there looking at Colonel Innes.
lay down and run down, and he'd say, I'm putting it in a box, and I'm vaulting it, went through the motion.
And he did the same thing with the discus and the shot like that.
So I learned a lot real fast from him.
Did he have any no-no's that he told his track team members?
Well, it was standard in those days.
You didn't smoke.
I mean, didn't smoke and didn't drink.
What about what they ate?
or their exercise routine?
Did he have any?
Well, I don't know for sure, but I had a routine.
I put my routine on it.
All right.
Let's see.
Now, let's back up on one thing.
Move you and your wife and your daughter to College Station.
What did you all bring down here, and where did you find a place to live?
We moved over on Dunn Street, and that was over, well, between here and
Between here and downtown Bryan.
All right, after two or three years, well, Bobby Rogers and all of them lived over in another neighborhood.
After three years, we bought a house and moved.
All right, we moved on Coach, on what they call Coach's Alley.
Tom Chandler lived on the corner.
And I lived on the corner, and right up the street, the assistant football coach used to be the dean.
After he got through coaching, he was in the registrar's office, assistant registrar.
You know him.
He's around all the time.
Anyway, he was coaching.
Zappalack.
Oh, Willie's Appalach.
No, no, Willie's Appalach.
We were right around the bend.
Worked in what dean's office?
In the registrar's office.
He was assistant registrar for a while.
You didn't know him.
He was a halfback coach, assistant coach under Stallings all over the years.
When you all moved down here, did A&M pay for any of your expenses?
No, uh-uh.
So you moved it yourself?
Yeah.
I got my daddy's old beat-up pickup truck.
He come up and helped us move.
And do you remember what that first house cost on Dunn?
That's the one I'm living in right now.
Oh, on Dunn Street was a rent house.
We rented that house.
Do you remember what the rent was?
I don't remember, but it's like $75 a month or something.
So the year you got here is 50?
That was 57.
57.
Uh-huh, 1957.
And you moved to the new house in 50?
About 1960.
60.
And you've been living there ever since?
Ever since, uh-huh.
And that house cost me $17,500.
And it's not a rich house, but right now it's saved about $85,000 or $90,000.
It's a nice little place.
How easy was it to get acquainted when you got here?
Oh, it was easy.
It was great.
Jim Myers took, we had parties, coaches, we called them coaches parties.
Like after a basketball game, Coach Rogers and then later on Metcalfe and everybody, there for years they were,
Everybody would come to the after basketball game.
We'd go over to the house.
You'd have Houston Chronicle, Dallas News, all those sports writers would be there.
And we'd all go in there and talk, you know.
And mainly the coaches and their wives and families.
And we did that for a long time.
And then Jim Meyer took everybody on the deep sea fishing thing.
Aggie owned the thing.
And we went to dinner at Galveston, pretty close to Galveston.
Anyway, we spent the night on the boat.
I mean, and then about 3 o'clock in the morning, the boat took off, went way out there about 65 miles, and we all got seasick and everything.
But anyway, we were a close-knit group.
Who became your close, in those early years, who were your closest friends, you and your wife?
It was the other coaches.
But there must have been some favorites of the coaches.
Which ones were y'all?
Well, it got to be Shelby.
and Ted Nelson, of course I hired Ted Nelson and Tom Chandler.
We were real close all the time.
Describe that first year, what track team talent did you inherit?
Well, I had a good
quarter miler and the quarter miler was named Cash and he was from New York and his daddy was a big Aggie.
And then I had a Latin American, a Spanish type guy about 6'3 and he was the best hurler we had.
Uribe, named Uribe.
But the best one we had was the shot putter and discus throwers.
In fact, I carried them to the NCA.
They were good enough.
They won the Southwest Conference.
Oh, Olin Hill.
Olin Hill.
Well, he was a discus champion.
All right.
About 10 years later, I get a phone call, Olin Hill.
Charlie, we got a great sprinter up here.
His name is Floyd Hurd.
You remember Floyd Hurd?
See, that's where the Aggies come in.
10 years, or maybe 15 years after I coached him,
He's a big businessman in Milwaukee.
I mean, he's a big, he's a stockbroker and all that stuff.
He calls me.
I go up there to see him.
We go over and see Floyd Heard, you know, take Floyd Heard out.
He'd give Floyd Heard a job during the summer.
And, you know, anyway, later on I signed Floyd Heard.
He'd come down, and his name was on that world record list.
But anyway, that's how the Aggies operate.
Anyway, Owen Hill, he was a disc restorer.
I had him at one year.
All right, you didn't recruit any for that first fall, I mean that first year.
It was too late, I presume.
Describe beginning to recruit for A&M.
How did you do it?
Well, I started, I recruited the same way that kind of they recruited me.
And I did pretty good.
The first group that I recruited won the Southwest Conference in cross country the next year or two before Putman took over.
I won two or three Southwest Conference champions, and E. L. Enter was one of them.
You see him, he ended up being a scientist, a big scientist guy.
The main thing about those early guys, they all did well after they graduated.
I mean, they were more like real students, you know.
Thad Crooks was one of them from up in East Texas, and he was a half-miler and everything.
I signed them pretty good, because Danny Roberts came along real close.
I forget whether it was the second or third year, but Danny Roberts was my first big shot-footer, and I got Darrell Hooper to help me recruit him.
So I had Darrell Hooper, and then Danny Roberts, and then Randy Mattson, and then Randy Burns and Michael Stutes.
3, 370 foot shot putters.
I'm the only coach in the world that had 370 foot shot putters.
When did, when you were recruiting, how and when did you decide whether you really wanted an athlete?
Well, my way I, the way I recruited was
get the best.
I mean, you know, if you could fill up 16 scholarships with 16 great athletes, you could win the national every year.
I mean, you know, nobody could do that, but that was my theory,
Like if I was later on when 16, 15, 6 or 16 foot was good in the pole vault, I would get a fair of a pole vault for the full scholarship, like Randy Hall, and it was worth it because he ended up, I think, winning the NCAA.
If they were good, just like the javelin coach here right now,
Juan de la Gaza, I recruited him, gave him a full scholarship and he makes the Olympic team for Mexico in a javelin and he holds A&M school records like 280 foot in a javelin, but we had to give him a good one like that, you give him a full scholarship.
And now, during the year, in those early years, when did you first go to visit with them?
Did you wait until the spring or did you start it in the fall?
No, we'd start as soon as school started.
There wasn't any limit on visits.
Just like one of the first Goodwin's that I signed was from Louisiana, and I started recruiting him when he was a junior, Ed Williams.
Ed was a two-time state champion out of Louisiana, never lost a 100-yard dash in his life.
And boy, we recruited him, LSU, and everybody recruited him.
I flew him in.
I had about 20 or 30 of the track team to go out to the airport to meet him.
Ed Williams gets off the plane with a bottle of whiskey and wine in each hand.
You know, what are you going to do?
That's the world's best sprinter.
I mean, he gets off the plane out at Easterwood Airport with whiskey in both hands.
He comes to celebrate.
Anyway, I end up finding the guy.
But I go back and forth.
I visit him.
I'd go down there sometime.
I'd leave here after practice.
and run, you know, drive four or five hours, go in there and visit for an hour, 30 minutes, and get back in here by eight or nine o'clock the next morning, I mean.
What did you try, when you were visiting with those athletes, what did you try to emphasize?
get down and show them in a block.
In fact, I've had several of them, like Broadhead, Doug Broadhead from Baton Rouge.
I mean, I beat LSU and all the people on him.
And later on, after I signed him, his daddy
They'd go to all the track meets, their mother and daddy.
And Broadhead, he was a quarter miler, but he won the Southwest Conference 221 years.
And Mr. Broadhead said, Charlie, you know the main reason, we're just kind of talking.
He said, you know the main reason how you got him?
I said, no, I don't, because I've recruited him a long time.
He said, when you got down there in the blocks in the house on your first visit,
You even pulled off your shoes.
I can't remember that.
You even pulled off your shoes so you wouldn't mess up the wallpaper.
You backed up and used the wall as your starting blocks.
You showed him how to do this and how to do that.
When he fired the gun, you walked out real slow using high arm action.
He said that sold him.
I'd do things like that.
Do you remember anything that you did in those early years recruiting that didn't work?
Yeah.
An old saying was, I don't like the bent arm.
I don't like the bent arm.
I tried to get a guy to sign, I don't like the bent arm.
At first, I didn't know what he taught.
I said, what do you mean the bent arm?
He said, I don't want to sloop.
I don't want to sloop.
See, in those days, everybody in the military, even a track guy had to wear a military uniform five days.
You had to wear it all the time.
Well, my first three or four years here, I went up to the headquarters and I got a permission deal that they didn't have to wear their uniform on Saturdays and Sundays.
I got it fixed where I could get them out of practice.
See, every Tuesday they had to drill.
I mean, no track practice on Tuesday.
They had to put on that uniform and go drill all day.
Can you imagine not having track practice or ROTC had to drill?
But anyway, I went up there and
And I talked to the head man up there and I said, man, they're going to fire me if I don't win.
They wasn't going to do that.
He said, well, I'll tell you what you do.
Every time you got a guy sick, he said, well, we send them out.
And they had a square before they'd march around the square.
I mean, two or three hours.
Well, that was a punishment deal.
I forget what they called it.
But anyway, they let me sign a deal saying a guy was
feeling bad, not sick, just feeling bad and he didn't have to put on the uniform and didn't have to go to the drill.
So every Saturday I'd get my team off, but anyway this kid, Ed Williams, that I finally signed from Louisiana that I went back and forth a hundred times to get
He was up in the dorm and he would throw balloons with him hard haul.
Not hard, yeah, hard haul right there on the campus.
He'd blow up his balloon with water and those military guys would walk across the street.
the inner tube deal and put the water in it, they'd shoot way across there and shoot at those generals going back and forth from the military.
I didn't know about all that, but I found out about it.
But anyway, Ed Williamfield, Charlie, he said, every Saturday and Sunday, he said, you're going to have to come tie me up here.
I said, what are you talking about?
He said, I'm going home and I'm not ever coming back because I hate this uniform.
I don't want to wear this damned old uniform.
He said, if you don't come tie me up, tie me down, I'm going to go home and never come back.
Well, boy, I mean, that first year or two, he'd go home sometime.
I was afraid he wasn't going to come back.
But he had problems.
I mean, he was a good sprinter, but he got that mononucleosis.
All right.
We went to the conference meet one or two years, and I had seven.
of my top track guys sick with mono.
All right, I had, I count them up, I had about five, nine, five sprinters.
I had some good, a bunch of good sprinters.
We didn't even run the relay.
They were all sick and they had mono and that was due from studying, staying up all night and studying and getting your body run down.
All right.
Had a kid died about that time, but he got bit on a cross-country course.
He was state champion.
This was later.
I don't even know what year it was, but he died.
He had, what do they call it, something bites you.
Radies?
No, a mosquito or something bit him, and he lost his mind.
They call me at the college hospital.
I go up to the college hospital, and he's standing behind the door in the college hospital.
And he's just standing there in the corner.
And he's been there all day and night.
And they said, we can't get a hold of his parents because he don't know their phone number.
So I called the parents, and right quick,
They said, we want you to get the parents to give us permission to operate, send them to the hospital or something.
And so anyway, I had to get a hold of the parents, and they gave me permission right off the bat.
But anyway, in about three or four days, he died.
And I take the whole, I charter a Greyhound bus, just like a track meet.
We take the whole track team to the way up at...
Oh, outside of Dallas, about a two-way school up there.
But anyway, he didn't have that mono.
He had something.
They claimed a mosquito bit him.
As you were recruiting, how important was it to persuade mother and father of the prospective recruit that this was- That was the number one thing.
How did you do that?
Well, I talked to the mothers and everything.
give you an instance on that my first black that i tried to recruit this was two years before i signed curtis mills i mean i knew see when i was running uh in like 1955 i was voted the world's fastest 220 man well for about four or five years
The only person that ever beat me would be a black at NCAA or some of those big meets, you know.
But anyway, when I came to A&M, after several, four or five years, I don't know how long I was here, I decided I had to recruit, start recruiting blacks.
But the first black, I think I told you this, was from Palestine, and he was, I mean, I went and watched him run in a track meeting.
He'd run a nine, 400-yard dash and just,
shut it off, you know, run 21 flat and a 220, just kind of dog crotch.
And I said, man, I got to have him.
So I started recruiting him.
And I'd go to the house right before school was out.
About 3.30, he'd come home, you know.
I'd go, I found that boy's house.
And the first time I went to the house, he lived in a little long.
little, long, narrow house, had a front porch, real narrow, front porch had a fling on it, had a screen door, but the screen door was all tore out and everything.
I drove up there right in front, didn't have a fence around the house, I drove right up in front of the house and someone was in the fling, I opened the door, and when I opened the door to get out, this woman stood up in the fling and said, stay there, don't get out, don't get out.
She come down off the steps out to the car and said, what do you want?
I said, well, I'm a track coach at Texas A&M.
I said, so-and-so lives here, doesn't he?
He said, yeah, yeah, he lives here.
I said, that's my grandson.
Yeah, he lives here.
I said, well, I come to talk to him.
I want him to try to get him to go to Texas A&M.
She said, oh, okay.
Then I started walking up.
She said, no, you sat back down in the car.
So I sat back down.
She shut the door.
She stood up there and talked to him until he came home.
We stood there for about five minutes.
Then she said, well, you better go, coach.
You better go.
So boy, I said, I'm coming back here.
So I go back the next week.
I drive up there in the same thing.
She's sitting in front.
And I open the door.
She heard her, stay there, stay there.
And I had to sit in the car until the boy had come.
The third time.
I drive up there, and she's in that frame, and he's going to be out of school, you know, coming home in about five or ten minutes.
I timed it just right.
Anyway, instead of me just getting out slow, I jump out, slam the door, and jump up on the front porch, and she stands up and kind of shakes her up.
She said, you can sit down there.
It had one chair, one chair on the front porch.
So we sat down there, and then when we visited, you know, all right, the next time I come, I get out, she's sitting on the front porch, and I get out, and she didn't say anything.
She said, come on in.
I walk up the front porch to sit down there.
Well, after a while, we're sitting there, and she's always, every now and then, she'd be drinking a cup of coffee in a little tin cup.
Well, I didn't even ask her anything, you know.
She was sitting there drinking that coffee.
So I go into the kitchen, see the pot, and I pour me another coffee cup.
I pour it.
She said, where are you going?
I said, I'm going to get me a cup of coffee.
She didn't say anything.
I come back, sit down, and that time I sat down with her.
We drank that coffee and we talked.
From that day on, I had a good chance of getting that track guy.
I don't know if I told you this or not.
All right, about a week or two weeks later, time for him to visit.
He was running track.
Anyway, state track meet was over.
We couldn't sign him until one week after the state track meet.
If they ran this Saturday at the state meet, that's what was legal in all those years.
The next week you can sign him.
So the next week after he won the state, I had him come to visit.
He was supposed to have got in there about 10 o'clock Saturday morning.
About 12 o'clock he never did show up, so I go in the office up there and I call the boy's house and the grandmother answers the phone.
I said, where's, I can't remember the boy's name.
I said, where's the truck guy?
Oh, he said, I'm not going to let him visit.
He said, is the white coach going to bring him down there?
She said, I'm not going to let him drive down there at Texas A&M with the white coach.
He said, that coach will leave him there and come back and he won't ever have a way to get back home.
I said, oh, my.
So then I get to think, what can I do?
So I called a high school.
I knew more coaches, and they gave me a black coach.
I called that black coach, and he said, I'll bring him down there tonight.
So he comes down there.
He brings him down there that night, and he spends the night and visits, and he goes back home.
The next week, I said, man, I'm going to go sign him.
So I drive up there.
No, he signed with Texas Southern.
He signed with Texas Southern, and then about two years later, he was Olympic champion and set the world record in the 100-yard bag.
But then the next year is when I got a couple of the blacks I was recruiting that year, and they didn't get them.
Did you ever hear from him why he didn't come here, why he went to Texas Southern?
No, uh-uh.
I never did get that close to him.
Well, yeah, the main reason he didn't, there wasn't any blacks at A&M.
And that's what she told me, that he didn't want to, he couldn't come to A&M because he'd be the only black there.
See, Lamar had integrated in University of Houston, and they were both getting a lot of those players.
Now, did we, at the time you were recruiting, trying to recruit black athletes,
Did we already officially have some black students on the campus?
There wasn't any.
There was, I was reading some of these books, I think there was a guy in the
majoring to be a doctor.
I mean, he didn't graduate from A&M, but there wasn't any students at A&M, there wasn't any.
Because then when I was recruiting Curtis Mills and those guys, I already had made up my mind, I was going to recruit four blacks so I could take a room together because you had two in a room using the same bathroom, four of them using the same bathroom.
I thought it'd be all right because when I made trips overseas when I was a senior in college, I roomed with black sprinters all the time and got along great with them.
I grew up with blacks.
you know, in East Texas.
Did anybody at A&M ever speak against your recruiting blacks?
No, no one.
I never got one letter from an Aggie.
And nobody in the athletic department?
No, everybody was happy that we got them.
Who was your first black coach?
Curtis Mills.
Curtis was the first?
And then when I signed Curtis, he was the first one I signed, but I had
I had four of them to visit at the same time, and I ended up signing all four of those.
When I got Curtis to visit, I had these other three from, to visit from Houston that I recruited.
Curtis went to High School O'Brien.
And Lufkin.
Lufkin.
He was from Lufkin.
Describe recruiting him.
Well, all right, we had a, the way I found him, we had this black guy that was a shoeshine boy over at MSC.
He was a high school star football player at the old Bryan Kemp High School.
Anyway, he was a part-time student off and on at A&M and he was working his way through by being a shoeshine boy.
He was a track athlete.
Later on, he coached in Houston and around.
But anyway, we'd talk all the time.
And I told him, I asked him would he go to Prairie View to the state track meet.
See, we had a track meet at the same time.
It was a week before the white track meet.
Then we, you know, call them white track meet, black track meet, state meet.
And the black track meet was a week before state, white track meet.
But anyway, nobody ever went to the black track meet because we didn't recruit them, you know.
But anyway, I decided to, I sent Arthur Dunn his name, Arthur Dunn.
All right.
I sent Arthur Dunn to go to Prairie View to the track meet and I gave him a whole stack of cards.
I had these cards made out with my name and you put your grade average and all this and that on there and what event you're in and your best distances.
And that was my first thing that I would get when I would recruit somebody.
By mail, if I'd write them a letter, I'd send them that card, you know, with a stamp on it where they didn't even have to buy a stamp, send it back.
But anyway, I gave him a whole stack of cards.
He went to, I said, I want every, the greatest guy, they got high jumpers, pole vaulters, whatever's good that you think can come to A&M, I'm gonna recruit.
I told him I'm gonna recruit four blacks and I wanna get the best four there was out of state of Texas.
So he came back with a bunch of cards and he said, the number one and number two guys from Lufkin High School, he said, this guy is number one.
He said, this guy, Curtis Mills, says he's number two.
He said, you get those two, he said, you won't have to get for two more.
You know, he had a whole bunch of cars filled out, but he said go to Luskin.
So the next day, I mean, I head to Luskin and I get the track coach and I show him those two cars that they filled out.
And he said, well, he said, this is, he just looked at the car.
He said, this is, this is the guy you want to get.
He said, you can't have this guy.
I said, what's the matter with this guy?
He said, oh, he can't even read and write.
He said, there ain't no way he can go to Texas.
He said, now he's the number one track guy.
But he said, this guy, Curtis Mills, he said, he's a good track man, he's fast, he's smart.
He said, he's got brothers and sisters that's smart.
He said, Curtis Mills had a sister that could outrun Curtis.
I found out about this later on, but he had a sister that could outrun Curtis.
But that was when they were about eight or 10 years old.
So anyway, I ended up signing Curtis Mills.
And then I'd go to Houston and get those other three guys.
And that first year when they, were there any problems for them being accepted by the student body?
No, I didn't have any problems.
All right.
In those early years, academically, how did y'all get the freshmen, get them involved?
Well, see, that's hard to the, at the time I knew that,
I felt like the blacks' grades might not be quite as good, but I found out fast that Worthing High School was a big, top-notch high school.
I mean, the city of Houston, there wasn't three blacks
school in the whole city of Houston so Worthing had a high class deal and when I went over and when I was recruiting I told that coach over there I said I want four a year just before I found Curtis I said I want at least four three or four a year best athletes and he had a bunch of good ones and I said of course I want them
to good grades where they can go to Texas A&M.
I said, I don't want them flunking out because they're going to be the first blacks.
I want to be sure they can pass.
So anyway, he brought those guys in there, four of them.
And I ended up signing three of them.
I didn't want four of them.
I didn't have four scholarships.
So I dropped one of them.
I don't even know who I dropped, but I picked out the top three because I could get them because they knew each other better than you can get one from here and one from over there, especially when you didn't have a single white guy on campus.
And they all knew that, you know.
But the deal on Hugh McElroy, Hugh McElroy, he said, Hugh McElroy ran a 9.7 last year as a junior coach, but he said he's not even running track this year.
I said, what?
He said, no, he gave up track.
He said, he's on the swimming team.
But he said, he's the best athlete we got.
He said, I tell you what, he said,
You can't throw a football 100 yards that he can't catch.
He said, you know where you throw a football out there, he can catch it.
And he was about 5' 11", 5' 10", had a big long arm, big shoulder.
And he said he's the best swimmer.
He said he's a sprint swimmer, just like a sprinter on track.